---
title: LPIC 101-500(103*) Study notes
date: 2020-06-30 15:26 +00:00
tags: [LPIC, 101-500,]
description: Notes from the Willey / Sybex LPIC1 Study guide
layout : post
---
## TOC
[Types of Shell](#shells)  [readlink](#readlink)  [cd_pwd](#cd_pwd)  [type](#type)  [envars](#envars)  [set](#set)  [which](#which)  [SHLVL](#SHLVL)  [man](#man)  [history](#history)  [cat](#cat)  [paste](#paste)  [od](#od)  [split](#split)  [sort](#sort)  [nl](#nl)  [more](#more)  [less](#less)  [head](#head)  [tail](#tail)  [wc](#wc)  [cut](#cut)  [uniq](#uniq)  [shaXXXsum](#shasum)  [grep](#grep)  [STDOUT](#STDOUT)  [STDERR](#STDERR)  [STDIN](#STDIN)  [sed](#sed)

## *Disclaimer*
These notes are for my own reference, and are by no means a complete listing of whats required for the exam. The things I note down are things that I *didnt* already know (or know in sufficent detail), and felt I should catalog them.
When the study guide has stipulated distro specific exercizes I have used the relevant docker images with added programs to test things out. My host OS is either Debian buster or Ubuntu 18.04.

##### Types of Shell <a name="shells"></a>

1. Bash - Bourne again shell, replaced Bourne
2. Dash - Debian shell with no cmd line editing - faster cmd line exec
3. Korn - Like bash but with more C tools.
4. tcsh - Tenex shell 🤷
5. z shell - An advanced shell with *themed prompts*

##### readlink <a name="readlink"></a>
Just outputs 1 field (just the thing linked to. Usefull for scripts)
```bash
root@Docker-centos:$ readlink /bin/sh 
bash
user@ubuntu:$ readlink /bin/sh
dash
```
##### cd_pwd <a name="cd_pwd"></a>
* cd on its own takes you 🏠 
* pwd - prints working directory

##### type <a name="type"></a>
Reveal wether a command is built into the shell or external to it. Or just the (type(ofsomething))
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ type pwd
pwd is a shell builtin
user@ubuntu:$ type bash
bash is /bin/bash
user@ubuntu:$ type whoami
whoami is hashed (/usr/bin/whoami)
```

##### envars <a name="envars"></a>
* BASH_VERSION Current Bash shell instance’s version number 
* EDITOR Default editor used by some shell commands 
* GROUPS User account’s group memberships 
* HISTFILE Name of the user’s shell command history file 
* HISTSIZE Maximum number of commands stored in history file 
* HOME Current user’s home directory name 
* HOSTNAME Current system’s host name 
* LANG Locale category for the shell 
* LC_* Various locale settings that override LANG 
* LC_ALL Locale category for the shell that overrides LANG 
* LD_LIBRARY_PATH Colon-separated list of library directories to search prior to looking
* through the standard library directories 
* PATH Colon-separated list of directories to search for commands
* PS1 Primary shell command-line interface prompt string 
* PS2 Secondary shell command-line interface prompt string
* PWD User account’s current working directory 
* SHLVL Current shell level 
* TZ User’s time zone, if different from system’s time zone 
* UID User account’s user identification number 
* VISUAL Default screen-based editor used by some shell commands

##### set <a name="set"></a>
* set : displays active envars
* Similar to env / printenv - except the latter also shows locally defined vars

##### which <a name="which"></a>
* Searches through $PATH for a given program

##### SHLVL <a name="SHLVL"></a>
Shell level demo  
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ PS1="Leethackstation"
Leethackstation: echo $SHLVL
1
Leethackstation: echo "Its just a terminal, nab" & bash
user@ubuntu:$ echo $SHLVL
2
```

##### man <a name="man"></a>
man -k (program)  *Shows all manpage sections*<br>
man -s (section no) (program)  *(Same as man (section no) (program))*<br>
eg : man 5 passwd

##### history <a name="history"></a>
* history -a *Appends current session commands to end of history file**
* -n *Appends hist file commands from current shell to current hist list*
* -r *overwrites current history list with cmnds from his file*
* -c *clears current hist file*
* -w *copies current list to hist file*

##### cat <a name="cat"></a>
* cat -A *shows everything (like -vET)*
* cat -E *shows newlines as $*
* cat -n *shows line numbers*
* cat -s *supress empty lines*
* cat -T *shows tabs*
* cat -v *show non printing chars*
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ cat some_spam
here is some text with line breaks
Here  are some tabs
and just a pointles line
user@ubuntu:$ cat -An some_spam
 1	here is some text with line breaks$
 2	Here  are some tabs ^I^I$
 3	and just a pointles line $
```

##### paste <a name="paste"></a> 
join two files togher side by side

##### od <a name="od"></a>
* Displays a files contents in octal
* od -cb *Displays the content of the file with octal byte locations*

##### split <a name="split"></a>
* split -l *split file by line number*
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ wc -l some_spam
3 some_spam
user@ubuntu:$ split -l 2 some_spam spam_split_
user@ubuntu:$ for i in spam_split_*; do wc -l $i; done
2 spam_split_aa
1 spam_split_ab
```

##### sort <a name="sort"></a>
* sort *standard sort order - alphabetical descending*
* sort -n *sorts by number*

##### nl <a name="nl"></a>
* nl *outputs a line number for each non blank line*
* nl -ba *include blank lines*

##### more <a name="more"></a>
a little bit like less?

##### less <a name="less"></a>
* can be used to open multiple files then jump between them with :n
* doesnt read whole file into mem, unlike more
* ? search backward
* / search forward
* n next search item

##### head <a name="head"></a>
with no swtich displays first 10 lines of the top of a file

##### tail <a name="tail"></a>
tail -n +n *displays the next 10 lines after n*

##### wc <a name="wc"></a>
* wc -c *displays files byte count*
   * -L *displays max line length*
   * -l *lines*
   * -m *chars*
   * -w *words*

##### cut <a name="cut"></a>
* cut -c 1 *displays first char of each line*
    * -b 1 *displays the first 1 bytes*
    * -d : *sets : as the delimiter*
    * -f : *shows only fields denoted by :*
    * -s : *shows only fields delimted by :*
    * -z *sets EOL to ASCII NUL*

cut -d ":" -f 1,7 /etc/passwd *cuts field 1 and 7 delimeted by :*

##### uniq <a name="uniq"></a>
displays uniq lines (repeated lines that proceed each other are removed)

##### shaXXXsum <a name="shasum"></a>
shadsum512sum filename *same hashing utility used in /etc/shadow*

##### grep <a name="grep"></a>
* grep -c *counts pattern match*
     * -d action (read,skip,recurse) *specifies an action to take when grep pattern matches a dir*
     * -E *for extended regex*
     * -i  *ignore case*
     * -v *inverted match*
     * -F -f (filename) *same as fgrep*
* fgrep -f filename *searches for multiple patterns specified in file*
* Regex stuff
    * Interpretation is based of LC_CTYPE env v 
    * ^ / $ - Anchor chars *^ beggining anchor, $ end anchor*
    grep -v ^$ *disaplys only lines that have text, since ^$ will match a line with anything on it*
    * Common regex character classes
    * [:alnum:] *All alphanumeric*
    * [:alpha:] *All alpha*
    * [:blank:] *All spaces and tabs*
    * [:digit:] *All digits [0-9]*
    * [:lower:] *All lowercase alpha [a-z]*
    * [:punct:] *All punctuation*
    * [:space:] *All space chars*
    * [:upper:] *All uppercase [A-Z]*

```bash
user@ubuntu:$ cat some_spam_with_numbers
here is some text with line breaks
Here  are some tabs 		
and just a pointles line
2020-07-08
9001 9002
0000 0090
user@ubuntu:$ grep [[:digit:]] some_spam_with_numbers
2020-07-08
9001 9002
0000 0090
```

```bash
user@ubuntu:$ head /var/log/mail.log | nl > ./mail.log
user@ubuntu:$ egrep '^     6|^     5' mail.log
     5	Jul  6 15:50:27 ...
     6	Jul  6 15:50:27 ...
```

##### STDOUT <a name="STDOUT"></a>
*Everything is a file* 
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ tty
/dev/pts/4
user@ubuntu:$ echo "Why hallo dere" > /dev/pts3
Hi to you too!
```

##### STDERR <a name="STDERR"></a>
* ">2" *redirects outputted error.*
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ grep -d skip hosts: /etc/* > hosts.txt >2 err.txt
user@ubuntu:$ cat hosts.txt err.txt
/etc/nsswitch.conf:hosts:          files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns myhostname
grep: /etc/brlapi.key: Permission denied
grep: /etc/gshadow: Permission denied
grep: /etc/gshadow-: Permission denied
....
```
* ">2" /dev/null *redirect to /dev/null*

##### STDIN <a name="STDIN"></a>
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ cat number_seq & tr " " "," < number_seq 
[1] 7703
49 43 23 32 23 87 
49,43,23,32,23,87,
[1]+  Done                    cat number_seq
```
* Redirection opperator summary:
    * '>' Redirect STDOUT to specified file. If file exists, overwrite it. If it does not
    exist, create it.
    * '>>' Redirect STDOUT to specified file. If file exists, append to it. If it does not
    exist, create it.
    * 2> Redirect STDERR to specified file. If file exists, overwrite it. If it does not
    exist, create it.
    * 2>> Redirect STDERR to specified file. If file exists, append to it. If it does not
    exist, create it.
    * &> Redirect STDOUT and STDERR to specified file. If file exists, overwrite it. If it
    does not exist, create it.
    * &>> Redirect STDOUT and STDERR to specified file. If file exists, append to it. If it
    does not exist, create it.
    * < Redirect STDIN from specified file into command.
    * <> Redirect STDIN from specified file into command and redirect STDOUT to
    specified file.

##### sed <a name="sed"></a>
* sed -
    * /g *global (all occourances on ONE LINE)*
    * /d *deletes line when matched*
    * '(line no)text' filename *replaces matched line*
    * e multiple scripts seperated by ;
    * f loads scripts from file
    * r extended regex
```bash
user@ubuntu:$ nl some_spam_with_numbers
     1  here is some text with line breaks
     2  Here  are some tabs 
     3  and just a pointles line
     4  2020-07-08
     5  9001 9002
     6  0000 0090
user@ubuntu:$ sed '6c Newlinehere' some_spam_with_numbers
here is some text with line breaks
Here  are some tabs 
and just a pointles line
2020-07-08
9001 9002
Newlinehere
```

##### Generateing command lines <a name="Generators"></a>
* xargs -
       * p asks permission for every command invoked.
            eg: ls -l some_spam*
* shell expansion -
    * command $(stdin)
    * eg rm -i $(ls some_spam*)
    
    














































